good morning everybody yesterday there
were 103 000 tests done in new south
wales and obviously that is a good good
number we want that to keep up
unfortunately we had a huge increase in
the number of cases of community
transmission to 8 pm last night there
were
633 cases of community transmission and
at this stage there are at least 62 of
those that were infectious in the
community during that time
it's really really important to stress
the following point at the moment
according to the data we have every
person who has the virus
is spreading it to at least more than
one person
now for us to know that we've reached
our peak
that can't continue
so what the data is telling us in the
last few days is that we haven't seen
the worst of it and the way that we stop
this is by everybody staying at home
you cannot get the virus if you do not
have contact with other people
you have to assume no matter where you
are in the state that every time you set
foot out of your door
that you have the virus or anybody you
have you're in contact with has the
virus
concerningly as we've seen right from
right at the beginning of this outbreak
out of the 633 cases
550 are still
from southwestern and western sydney
so the vast vast majority of cases are
in younger people
in those areas of concern and that is
where our focus
needs to remain although given the high
viral load it could mean that it could
be an outbreak anywhere if anyone from
those communities moves to work in
another community
before i move forward to the suburbs of
concern i do want to extend my
condolences to the three
families of loved ones who
passed away to 8 pm last night
a family of a male or a male in his late
60s who was in liverpool hospital he
wasn't vaccinated
two males in their late 70s who both
passed away in the pain hospital one was
unvaccinated and one had only received
one dose of vaccine again we extend our
deepest condolences
to the families of those three gentlemen
and obviously appreciate how distressing
this is
and i hope this really reinforces the
message
that even if you think you're okay
don't risk giving the virus to those you
love the most some of the stories we
hear every day
about the way people are suffering the
way people are seeing loved ones dying
the impact it's having is just
devastating
so just stay home
please don't leave home unless you
absolutely have to
and we know where the virus is lurking
we know where the problems are in terms
of transmission its workplaces and
households and we just ask people to
heed that advice
as i said there were 550 cases in within
those areas of western and southwestern
sydney that are that continue to be a
challenge and the particular suburbs we
want to call out are maryland's
guildford auburn greenacre laguna st
mary's and strathfield
and these are the suburbs of most
concern where we're seeing continuing to
see an escalation of cases
in western new south wales the deputy
premier will give further detail as well
dr chand
we
obviously remain concerned about western
new south wales especially um in our
remote indigenous communities and we're
just calling out anybody who is in will
kenya will kenya in the last little
while needs to come forward and get
tested please make sure
you are on alert
but especially in and around the volcano
area and
as we've said in the last few days there
continue to be cases especially in the
west dubbo community
now as you heard yesterday we have an
ambitious task of getting jabs into the
arms of half a million 16 to 39 year
olds in those areas of concern and can i
please call out everybody who's between
the ages of 16 to 39
in those local government areas of
concern that we've been highlighting to
come forward and get vaccinated
we got an extra half a million doses
from the federal government which we're
very grateful for
extra doses of pfizer and that will be
going straight into the arms of those 16
to 39 year olds in those local
government areas of concern
to make sure we not only keep them and
their families safe but also contribute
to the reduction of the spread
and obviously if you go to new south
wales.gov you can now book for your
vaccine and we encourage you to do that
as quickly as possible so that we can
vaccinate as many people as possible
now vaccines are critical
obviously not only in dealing with this
outbreak but also maintaining the safety
of our citizens moving forward and
obviously ensuring that we get back to a
normal life as soon as we can
but i just need to remind everybody when
you get your first jab
it takes about two or three weeks for it
to become effective
so don't think you're immune don't think
you can stop or relax you know not
wearing your mask when you need to or
not socially distancing or not staying
at home when you should be
so make sure please make sure that when
you are vaccinated don't assume that you
can't get the virus or give it on to
others
and also because we haven't yet hit our
milestones of having the majority of our
population vaccinated it is still a huge
threat to those unvaccinated in the
community for those who are vaccinated
to carry on normal business without
strictly adhering to the health rules
dr chant will now give the health update
the deputy premier will talk about
regional new south wales minister
dominello will give an update on
business grants i want to make very
clear that during these difficult times
we don't want anyone going without
whether you're an individual who's had a
reduction in your hours of work or
you're not working
whether you're a business who has
suffered uh because of the restrictions
or the lock down please uh make sure
that services and uh and dollars are
available to be to be uh putting your
accounts as soon as possible and
minister dominello will give an update
on what service new south wales is doing
in that regard
and as you all know this is day three of
operation stay home led by the new south
wales police force and deputy
commissioner warboys will give an update
on the compliance measures i'll now ask
dr chan to give her update
thank you premier
i can't express enough my level of
concern at these rising numbers of cases
we have
633 locally acquired cases of covet in
the community
as the premier is indicated
every person is passing on the virus to
more than one person so we are
considering continuing to see case
numbers increase
whilst vaccination will be an aid
and essential for us getting to a point
where we can live safely with covert our
vaccination coverage at the moment is
far too low
we need to push that up as much as we
can
but in the meantime we also need to do
everything we can to not come in contact
with anyone to minimize our movements
and to continue to get tested
and isolate if you have the most minimal
of symptoms
we currently have
462 covert cases admitted to hospital
and 77 people in intensive care
25 of those whom require ventilation
we have people in their teens in their
20s in their
30s in their 40s in their 50s in their
60s in their 70s and in their 80s
and we know that for every one of those
individuals in icu particularly those in
the older age groups
they have a real and material risk of
death
we will see more admissions
and more deaths if these numbers
continue to increase
we have a collective responsibility
to do all we can
to stop
seeing those deaths
and hospitalizations continue to
increase
again i'd like to pass my condolences on
to the families of those who have lost
their loved ones
and again reinforce that we are seeing
very high rates in suburbs such as
maryland's guildford alban greenacre
uguna saint mary's and stratfield
please be cautious wherever you are in
the state
but a particular call out to those
suburbs
in western new south wales
there have been 23 new cases of covert
reported to 8 pm last night
and this brings the total case numbers
to around 139
there's been a case in burke
also
people in the affected area through
western new south wales and new south
wales more broadly need to be vigilant
if they've been in will canya in recent
days
because we think that there's been some
exposure in will canyon
new south wales health on going sewage
surveillance program has detected ba
fragments in bathurst and orange
and again we need those communities to
be vigilant and come out for testing
and also overnight we've had a detection
in the yamba sewage treatment plant
so again that we ask that the
communities be particularly vigilant
so in conclusion
can i just urge the community to follow
the public health
rules
don't try and look for loopholes
you know the intent
please minimize your movements
stay at home
we can get through this
and i'm very confident with all the
efforts in place that we can but we need
everyone to play their part
well good morning i can i also start by
offering my deepest condolences to those
families that lost loved ones you remain
in our prayers
as dr chan touched on western new south
wales continues to be of concern
for our regional rural communities 23
cases overnight predominantly 17 of
those cases were in dubbo but there are
cases in madgie naremine gilgandra in
the far west
kenya has three cases burke and the
reported case of broken hill yesterday
it is clear that this issue in central
in western new south wales is where our
focus and our priority is and the
message for everybody is to follow the
state home orders cut down mobility make
sure that you get tested at the first
sign of any symptoms and at the same
time of course consider vaccination our
pathway in the regions also is about
vaccination and book in for your
vaccination as quick as possible in the
hunter new england 15 new cases where 10
in newcastle two in maitland and three
in lake macquarie illawarra shoalhaven
there were four new cases
three in shell harbor and one in
wollongong as dr chan touched on the
sewage surveillance continues to pick up
fragments in yamba orange wollongong and
bathurst and overnight since the 8 pm
recording we know there is a case in the
central coast and the mid north coast
that being in kempsey armadale and
tamworth including the northern rivers
are no new cases so my message continues
to be the same message over the past few
days that if we want to control what's
occurring in regional rural new south
wales that we don't have the continued
growth in numbers and of course the
western new south wales is our focus we
need everybody in the regions to do the
right thing because our surveillance our
our contact traces the work we're doing
through sewerage surveillance and
understanding how uh contagious and
transmissible the geld australian is
really is putting regional ruling new
south wales on that knife edge so again
to everybody do the right thing and stop
the spread
well good morning
about a month ago we opened up a series
of grants for businesses
and today i want to give you a report on
those grants can i first begin by
apologizing to all the businesses that
did not receive their grants on time or
did not receive phone calls when they
should have expected phone calls
at service new south wales and myself we
pride ourselves on providing great
services to the people of our state it's
a service that we built up over seven or
eight years now that is not just
renowned here in australia but around
the world and the quality of service
that we've provided over the last month
is not up to standard uh we are making
headway in relation to the business
grants and i'll provide you with
the figures today
about 260 000
grants
have been received so far
of the 260 000 grants
about 200 000 have been approved and or
paid that is 200 000 businesses have
either received the money or will
receive the money in the next few days
of the 60 000 odd grants remaining
about 10 000
we are waiting from customers or
businesses to give us more information
in terms of whether they want to proceed
with the grant or additional information
of the fifty thousand then remaining
we still have about
fifteen
that is more than two weeks old
now we've got 587 assessors
that is working
specifically to make sure that we clear
that backlog of 15 000 which represents
about five percent of the total amount
now across the board the average time
from the grant application to payment is
seven and a half days working days but
again
we still have about fifteen thousand
grants with an average time of of more
than two weeks that we are really
putting our best efforts towards in the
coming days
in relation to wait times again they
have not been great
and you would expect that with 260 000
applications we had a 4 000 in 4 000
increase
in call demand at the peak
we've never had this level of demand
before and when we were setting up this
grant program in many ways we were
flying and building the plane at the
same time
but we are again making a lot of
progress and we're reporting that
progress daily
on a dedicated service new south wales
web page but in terms of call times
at their peak they were over two hours
last week but they got down to 18
minutes and now they're under 10 minutes
again under 10 minutes is not great
compared to what we're used to at
service new south wales we accept that
but these are challenging times and i'd
be grateful for your patience
uh again i'm happy to report uh further
but if anybody wants any information at
7 30 a.m we update the service new south
wales website so that we can have full
transparency and accountability in terms
of how this grant program is rolling out
thank you
premier good morning everyone
736 penalty notices issued in the last
24 hours right across new south wales
by police in in country areas in greater
sydney
it's disappointing there is absolutely
no doubt about that
but
but when you look at 448 of those issued
to people who were moving outside of
their house without a good reason that
again shows us that people
are clearly want to step outside of the
rules and put their own safety at risk
and that of their community and their
family
a couple of examples is that
yesterday police were called to a place
called mendorin which is near dubbo they
spoke to a fellow there that had had an
accident in his car struck a kangaroo
that person told police quite willingly
that he arrived about 10 days ago from
queensland
he
came to the airport he hired a car and
he decided that he would travel around
country new south wales on back roads
because he was sick of covert that he
needed to get out and about
this person once he had those
difficulties local people were called to
assist him and quickly reported his
behaviour to police and he was issued a
thousand dollar infringement notice
directed to return to sydney to a
nominated address and then police uh
checked that he did return to sydney to
that
continue their addre operations um
thousands of those those checks nearly 4
000 checks in the last 24 hours
a man at padstow was checked in the
morning i thought that that obligation
of police had finished there and the adf
he decided that he'd leave his home
after lunch in the afternoon
police were aware that this might occur
they went back to that location found
him away from his home
made a telephone call he tried to tell
police that he was taking the garbage
bins out which was clearly not the case
the man returned to speak to police out
the front of his home he was issued a
five thousand dollar penalty notice but
again these people need to understand
that it's not just a tick in the box
check the police and adf will do we will
understand the people's movements we
will understand the household we'll
gather intelligence and information that
makes this process in terms of checking
on people
that should be isolating that should be
in their home that they remain good to
that and they do not put the community
at risk thank you premier what's it
going to take here is it going to take a
thousand cases a day 1200 cases a day
before you institute a proper
stage for lockdown this lockdown is not
as hard as in new zealand as in
melbourne it's clear there's this gap
before the vaccination how many cases a
day is it going to take oh look uh we
rely on the advice of our health experts
we know that our lockdown is extremely
harsh and extremely strict
and we appreciate the pressure that so
many families are on because of the
lockdown the vast majority of people are
doing the right thing
but what concerns us can you just let me
finish the question answer please
but what concerns us is as deputy
commissioner warboys just reported
police found at least 400 examples in
one day of people leaving their home
when they shouldn't be
in one day alone police found 400
and what worries us is for every person
we find doing the wrong thing there
could be somebody else doing the wrong
if there's eight million people in this
state of course 400 people are going to
be doing the wrong thing you have to
have the right health orders and the
right lockdown in place
we have
had
and continue to have the right settings
in place but unfortunately too many
people continue to do the wrong thing so
the settings are right excuse me it's
not your press conference there's a lot
of other journalists here as well
can i just say this point that we know
the settings we have in place are some
of the harshest that australia has ever
seen but not the harshest however
we also know that unfortunately it only
takes a small number of people to do the
wrong thing
to cause this amount of spread that's
why i'm urging everybody stay home
don't leave home unless you absolutely
have to
and i'm also saying to people we know
that there is the light at the end of
the tunnel we know we'll get through
this but it will take us much longer
than we need to
if people keep doing the wrong thing
now i'm really really pleased that we
have so many people coming forward to
getting vaccinated so many tests are
happening every day i mean yesterday we
had up more than 106 000 people get
vaccinated in new south wales that is
fantastic
we had more than 105 000 people come
forward and get tested that is fantastic
but we also had
too many people doing the wrong thing
and having said that i know how
frustrating this is
for the millions and millions of people
doing the right thing every day across
the state and i share that frustration
all of us are making huge sacrifices
when we think about the loved ones we're
not seeing
kids aren't at school i mean this is a
horrible situation
and it will take us longer if people
continue to do the wrong thing that's
why we're grateful at operation stay
home the new south wales police have
already uh not only started their
operations but already identified
hundreds and hundreds of people in a
couple of days alone
doing the wrong thing imagine if only
even if out of those hundreds and
hundreds of people doing the wrong thing
a couple have the virus and are going
around the community spreading it that
sets all of us back
so i can't stress enough you can have
every single rule out there in place
but when people blatantly blatantly do
the wrong thing
it causes grief for all of us why is
victoria 20 a day and your numbers are
going up given the numbers that they are
going up the difficulties right i mean
is it now time for you to stop promising
some restrictions will ease next month
well no i i think that the challenge for
us is to make sure that whilst we're
asking people to adhere to the strict
rules that we're also asking them to
come forward and get vaccinated the
higher the vaccination rate
gives us opportunities to think about
what we can do to support people that
are completely vaccinated during the
difficult months of september and
october
but what is most important now is just
turning the corner and as i said at the
beginning of this press conference
at the moment there's a technical term
called the r factor or the r rating at
the moment they are effective or the
reproductive rate means that every
person who has the virus is spreading it
at the moment to about 1.3 people we
need that number to be below one we need
to make sure that whoever has the virus
doesn't spread it to anybody else that's
what will turn the corner and until we
hit that corner we're going to see case
numbers rise and the way we stop case
numbers rising
is stopping mobility stop leaving your
home unless you absolutely have to
everyone is clear on the rules
and all the suggestions that that people
throw at throat governments of any
persuasion
have have little impact apart from the
margins the main impact is people
reducing their mobility
don't move around unless you have to
don't leave your house unless you have
to the numbers aren't going up in
melbourne they're not their 20 a day
every day premiere
given that
are you now considering any further
restrictions are you right now
considering anything else that you might
bring in in the next couple of days or
is it essentially up to us to do the
right thing well it's up to every
citizen to do the right thing but it's
also
part of the police compliance measures
the operations stay at home which is
really ramped up
commissioner fuller and the new south
wales police force have put in measures
across the state
to clamp down on those people doing the
wrong thing the minority of people doing
the wrong thing
and you can have the strictest rules in
place the strictest rules in place delta
leaves no room uh for error delta leaves
no room for anybody doing the wrong
thing and even up in melbourne and even
but even even in other jurisdictions
which which assumed a short sharp
lockdown would get a right way i'll get
rid of a handful of cases have found how
stubborn the delta variant is going up
there aren't they
we're getting reports
we're getting reports that there remains
confusion about the five kilometer
distance people can be traveling so for
instance in lgas that are really large
like wollongong which is 48 kilometers
top to bottom there are people living
there that are still traveling 15 to 30
cases to go for a bush walk or go for a
bike ride residents are really concerned
there's a number of different shopping
centres as well that people can go to so
can you please just clarify
how far can people actually travel for
exercise and for going shopping even if
they have a big election okay in the
areas of concern you cannot move more
than five kilometers from your house
so in those local government areas of
concern five kilometers full stop
however as the deputy premier would
attest
in many regional communities your
nearest shop might be quite a distance
away and that's why within the local
government area is allowable but can i
just be straight about this
if you live anywhere in the state you
should not be going beyond five
kilometers unless you absolutely have to
that is the bottom line
that is the bottom line and you
shouldn't be leaving your house unless
you absolutely have to but we also have
to get the right balance in terms of
knowing uh that in some parts of the
state in some parts of our communities
uh people need to go further to get
essential things but in but in those
areas of concern
no more than five k's full stop
no more but even then you shouldn't be
leaving your house and that's very clear
all the areas are concerned stewardess
and the commissioner publicly said
yesterday there would be a change to
that rule that the 5k rule would not
apply for people who want to leave that
lga on the border and you said yesterday
no that's not correct does that mean mr
fuller has been overruled on that not at
all can i say that the police have
always
made we've made sure the police always
have the powers they need to do the job
they want the police commissioner knows
that uh without exaggerating the police
commissioner and i are probably in touch
ten times a day uh as i am with dr chand
and the minister for health and the
health people we are in regular contact
about what we need to do in order to see
a turnaround but it is a collective
responsibility it's not government or
business or community or individuals
it's all of us working together it's all
of us working together
with the public health order i'm not
sure he's there if people are still
technically allowed to travel you know
further than five kilometers to go to
another shopping centre in an area as
large as woolen i think people
understand what the rules are
every time you leave the house
you have to assume you have the virus or
somebody else has the virus
every time you leave the house you're
risking your health and the health of
others we can't stress enough
minimize your activity minimize your
mobility don't go beyond five kilometers
now these are the basic rules in place
and there are always exemptions
and that's because if you don't put
those things in place communities
not only suffer but then health
department would be flooded with
thousands and thousands and thousands of
exemptions every day
so please know people know the basic
rules and we ask everybody to stick to
those basic rules and know that it's a
collective responsibility and i know i
give the same message every day
i know i give the same message every day
because some people aren't hearing the
same message
stay at home don't break the rules
everybody knows what they mean people
are just a small number of people are
choosing to ignore what the rules are
and as deputy commissioner warboy said
in one day alone
more than 400 people the police know of
across the state 400
left their house for the wrong reason
dr chan question for dr chan
is it correct to say that it's not just
the geography of the lga it's the
population within it so you can have a
smaller population in the city or a
smaller area in a sydney lga that has
for instance 100 000 people if the
wollongong lga has 100 000 people it's
still contained within that same number
is that not the rationale behind the lga
movements look the rules are in place to
keep everybody safe and we just ask
the vast majority of people know what
the rules are the vast majority of
people know what the risks are
and it's important for us not to get
caught up in the weeds of an issue what
is really important for us
is for people just to do the right thing
please do the right thing
uh stay at home
and when you are leaving your home
because you have to
only do so assuming that you've got the
disease or someone you're coming into
contact with has the disease but every
day that our vaccination rates go up
that is an important weapon in dealing
with this outbreak but the most
important weapon in dealing with this
outbreak is for everybody to do the
right thing and we don't give you every
example of when people are doing the
wrong thing but in some communities
where you know when there are illegal
gatherings when people flagrantly
dis disrespect the rules it is
heartbreaking it causes us heartbreak
every day every day
to see examples of a number of people
coming together knowing they're doing
the wrong thing and not caring they're
doing the wrong thing
can i just ask everybody to care don't
care about
us or the broader community but care
about those closest to you
care about your family your friends that
you could be causing inordinate amounts
of grief
and i just ask everybody to care about
their loved ones even if they don't care
about the rest of us even if they don't
care about
those people they don't know
care about those closest to you because
you are risking their lives and you're
risking their livelihoods but as far as
the vast majority of citizens please
know i get that the vast majority want
to do the right thing and are doing the
right thing and we are all sitting at
home or or really really concerned that
a number of people are choosing to
continue to disregard the rules
but i am someone who always always knows
that at the end of this difficult time
there'll be a time again when we live
freely but that will take longer
if people continue to do the wrong thing
and that's why police and adf
have more people on the ground than ever
before
to clamp down on people doing the wrong
thing
and we don't apologize for having that
strong presence we don't apologize
for doing that that going the next level
because uh the future
of our freedom relies on it our ability
to get out of this quickly relies on it
dr chan dr chan dr chan please
dr champ if i can just ask
i've been told that you are in agreement
with commonwealth health officials that
this lockdown needs to go harder and you
have expressed that over several weeks
to the premier and she is not on the
same page as you on this what is your
comment
can i just indicate my
the fact that the premier
is very committed to achieving the same
outcomes we have a shared vision a
shared vision which is high vaccination
coverage and very low levels of
community transmission i can't re
restate that
the we under
i don't want to
i can't comment any further than say
the premier in all my discussions with
her is absolutely committed
to
increasing vaccine coverage
and getting low community transmissions
in new zealand that aren't shut here
what why why why
why is 25 of construction only open in
melbourne why can't you play golf in
melbourne why is there a curfew in
melbourne they've got 20 cases a day
there's 633 here why haven't we got
totals here except the premier
stubbornly refuses to introduce them so
look i'm not going to going to um
respond apart from saying that we the
premier is and i are both committed
passionately to seeing the case numbers
decline i cannot stress
that even with high vaccine coverage we
cannot
do well with the case numbers we've got
so the challenge for us
as a community
is to work together to get those numbers
down we need to see the numbers very low
in terms of case numbers and we need
to see the vaccine coverage very very
high so my key message
is please get vaccinated we have two
very good vaccines
access points in the community are
increasing and can i thank the hard work
of the gps our own state services
and pharmacies in rolling out and
bringing the vaccine accessible to the
people we have the tools
but we have to also address the issues
that are leading to ongoing
jump and we have seen transmissions
doing the wrong thing but why such a
jump is it just people doing the wrong
thing going into different households or
is there another explanation for such a
jumping cases
the communities of southwestern sydney
and western sydney
are a resilient community and i think
it's also very much very important to
reflect on the fact that they've been
experiencing some of the harshest
lockdown conditions anywhere and
restrictions
it is important to note that they
the a lot of the essential workers
that keep our economy
moving and i mean that in terms of the
basic economy of putting food on our
tables our essential items that we need
for our life
live and work
in southwestern sydney and they also
work outside those areas of southwestern
sydney western sydney
so what we are seeing is workers from
those areas
doing the fantastic work they do in
supporting disabilities supporting aged
care
um being working in factories and
cleaning and other things going into
workplaces
leading to transmission
and then transmission occurs and then a
seeding of another household
we also know that some
people
there are a small proportion of people
are
not perhaps
taking covert as seriously as i would
like them to
and then what's happening is they're
potentially
going into multiple households
so for instance you might have one
person who has connections across three
households but in each of those
households you've got tens of people
and we know that household transmission
for covert is so common we're also
seeing outbreaks in childcare centers
and that's a feature we haven't seen in
previous outbreaks because the delta
strain seems to be able to transmit more
in the childhood setting
these are all challenges we need to work
collectively for but can i also
reiterate
you know even the comment before around
you know can you go 5k or can you go to
shopping center or whatever a clear
message is
shop local stay local and spend the
least time
in a place where there are other people
that you can so please be purposeful in
your shopping
make a list and do not linger and stay
distant and wear a mask
can i just ask you it was an important
question that andrew asked me for and
you didn't quite answer it
is there a fracture between your vision
you have a shared vision with premier no
doubt you want new south wales to be
health and healthy and prosperous and to
get out of lockdown
the question wasn't about a shared
vision the question was about a
methodology on how you achieve that
the people of new south wales deserve to
know
if
you have given health advice to the
government i appreciate the position
you're in but we're looking for the
truth here have you given health advice
to the government that has not been
adhered to have you suggested a harsher
lockdown is needed and that advice has
been ignored so yeah it's a yes no
no it's not as
it's not as easy as that um what we do
is define the problems
so we define the fact the settings that
um transmissions occurring the fact that
we need to decrease mobility we need to
reduce
presence workplaces we need to keep
activity to the most essential
those are the objectives we need
what we need to do is then
have that informed by how is the best
way to achieve that because we do not
understand the critical logistics of
where we may have lead food lead someone
to have food insecurity we don't
understand um you know the requirements
on fire brigade who might have staff
drawn from a particular point so we can
comment from public health perspective i
want to see less people in settings
where there's other people so that
includes workplaces childcare centers
we've made it clear about our position
about educational settings so from my
perspective i want to see the less
people
in settings where there are other people
are you seeking restrictions
i'm just commenting on the fact that
with the r effective
above one we are seeing growing case
numbers
we need to drive that are effective
beneath one
and i am committed
strongly to be saying that that is what
we need to do
sorry just on child care
quite a specific one and it is a problem
and you've said multiple days in a row
child care centres are a problem
people are still sending their kids to
school to child care centres when
they're at home because they're working
from home and it's hard
do you need to clamp down on who is
sending their child to a child care
centre i've been very clear that
what we're asking the community to do is
to not send children to child care if
they
unless they absolutely and need to and
if they're just working from home that
wouldn't be in my mind a reason to do it
that is critical and as i said i want to
see decreased attendance across all
workplaces
and
i think this is a shared responsibility
um industry government us as individuals
have a responsibility to do
[Music]
are quite angry this learn that their
areas aren't being tested within sewage
is it true that there's around 60 of a
possible
157 sites being tested and given it's
such an important warning signal can we
do them all
we are ramping up our sewage testing
capability and we've also re-prioritized
our rural testing over some of our
metropolitan testing which becomes less
useful when we have high case numbers so
we are definitely trying to make space
there are some logistic challenges to
get the samples in in a certain state
and they have to be collected at the
peak flow
so we are working with a number of
regional councils to expand and i'm
actually really pleased
that so many councils want to come on
board with sewage surveillance it is a
very useful tool
and i look forward to expanding that
program but obviously we have finite
resources while we're scaling and we
need to prioritize our samples
that you would recommend or that you are
considering to bring that r rate down to
stop mobility as you say is our main
goal are there any that you are
considering or is it your health advice
that we have reached the ceiling of
restrictions in new south wales and this
is as far as we can go
um so look those mat those are a matter
for discussion that we have regularly
with the premier um and we will be
consider you know as i said we
continually reflect on the data any
intelligence we're getting from how
transmission is occurring and keep on
updating our um our ideas and concepts
and they need to be tested because we
need to make sure that we don't create
more harm with some of the settings we
might propose and that they are tested
um
any concepts we might come so that we
have suggested some extra settings we we
have ongoing discussions
about
um what more can we do obviously the
premier has been very clear that our
reproductive rate uh the re are
effective is above one we need to get
that below one and we need to and from
my personal
um view is we need to get it as low as
possible so we can see that the case
numbers can decline as rapidly as
possible but there's a range of
strategies already that have been
announced and there is a lag in the
figures um but obviously i'm concerned i
cannot say other than the fact that i'm
incredibly concerned we've had
construction back sorry just had
construction back can i just ask the the
obvious requirement around that was that
it had to be vaccinated from those lgas
how many people have you got out there
checking that that's being adhered to it
oh look i think that's a matter i'd have
to take up with industry who has set up
i think understand that there were
discussions with industry i'll have to
get back to you in relation to the
charge of that inspection process if
there is one uh so i believe that that's
within the responsibilities of the
employers
um but i will take that on notice
on children transmitting the virus
a lot of these children are obviously
not yet knowledgeable for the vaccine
especially that cohort from 12 up how
eager are you to see otagi approve the
vaccine for them how are you preparing
plans on how you're going to vaccinate
them when they are approved
uh look i i firmly believe we need to
get in and vaccinate our 12 to
um to 15 year olds at the moment we've
vaccinated the 16 year olds i'm really
keen to get into the 12 to 15 year olds
personally
and i await the advice around that more
routinely
certainly we do vaccinate children with
underlying conditions down to that level
i think that we are watching
internationally the evidence around
younger children but i think that given
the transmission of delta it may well be
that in future we do provide vaccines in
the younger age groups but those are a
matter that otagi is watching and we
obviously always follow the advice of a
target i think we need to respect the
scientific approach but as i said
personally
i believe that we will be doing
school-based you know targeting
school-aged children
particularly the high school children's
children um very quickly
because we know they do contribute to
transmission
news
a fleet of ambulances waiting outside a
sydney hospital with covert infected
people with nowhere to go
how much of the concern is the
government is not just for the health of
people but for hospitals ability to cope
now that we are into the 600s that is
going to escalate and the second part of
my question
is it true that a vaccination hub at
westmead is being closed down and if so
is that to make way for more covert
patients uh second part of the question
robert i don't know i haven't been
advised but uh the operational team we
can find out from the operational team
because we've got
uh scores of obviously sites now across
sydney and the state as to the first
issue yeah i did see your story and
i actually spoke to the hospital
management this morning and the
ambulance commissioner just to see what
was going on
there's no question as i've said a
number of times that the health system
is under stress
but what's happening at westmead is a
challenge
and they had
a number of ambulances where
um
normally
pre-covered anyway any any of those sort
of situations would be because
there was a blockage in the ed
that is too many patients arriving at
one time rather than a steady flow and
some of those would have to be
transferred out to the wards
and the blockage there could be usually
from the wards but what i'm told is that
in this particular case the ed
the emergency department is trying to
manage people who could be potentially
covert exposed not necessarily in the
ambulances so what they're doing is
they're trying to work through a
logistical system a better a better flow
system within the emergency department
to allow
the staff not to be
exposed and other patients not to be
exposed to people coming in who may have
it before they know it so they're trying
to do that image alone i mean it shows
that the hospitals really aren't coping
at the moment
as i've said before robert and i've said
it a number of times now that obviously
the health systems in new south wales is
under a degree of stress but staff are
doing a really good job
and i think
i want to thank the
nurses and doctors in the emergency
department who are trying to look after
patients and doing the first class job
westmood's an outstanding hospital
and obviously at the same time the
paramedics are bringing bringing the
patients in with a range of issues but
they're also having to check whether or
not they are covered positive so they're
implementing some changes i was informed
as to
try and do some testing actually
outside hopefully your cameras won't be
out there saying this is a disaster
because it's not it's simply that
they're managing patients outside to
make sure that they're doing covert
tests uh before the patients are
actually taken in because that allows
them to know how the flow should work in
the emergency department
sorry just one from ashley and then all
yeah look i
i've spoken to the
health team this morning and i want to
stress again as i did yesterday
that
if a woman
has any symptoms at all
she should go to her gp
and the gp can order all those same
diagnostic tests
so there should be no immediate concern
at all for that and i've spoken to
not only a number of senior health
officials who have confirmed that that
is the case so i don't think there's any
cause for concern but the balancing act
here is
it's very close proximity as any as any
person who's had a obviously a breast
screen would know there's the staff and
the woman in a very close proximity
and
the reason that they've actually stopped
just the surveillance is that
the risk factors because there's a
substantial number of cases of covered
obviously uh currently
that the risk factors outweigh the
benefit
for the system and for the individuals
because if you had a lady who came in
and have a staff member there who was
close to that staffing we did have it
didn't have covert as we've discussed a
million times you can have cobra without
actually having any symptoms at all
that's a risk for the patient but if the
patient has any concerns i stress again
go to your gp that's the advice i've had
for the health senior health officials
in the state go to your gp have a talk
and they will refer you to the
appropriate screening
screening that can take place
last question please
um yeah i'll give them
sorry um the the first one uh apparently
police have asked uh councils are
concerned to lock up playgrounds remove
basketball hoops etc as a social
distancing measure
so can i can we do that one and then yes
um why is that necessary yeah i think
that what uh police are after is a uh a
shared responsibility around any um
areas of exercise or recreation
if we go right back to the start in
terms of covert safe plans by
businesses councils uh people who own
entities um if that covert safe plan uh
represents value in terms of those
exercise areas um police will be fully
supportive of that but what we're asking
is that local government work with their
local emergency management and their
local police to make areas safe for the
public
period surrounding the regional permits
given that they can't fly to them apply
for them until friday and they come into
place
i think commissioner fuller has made it
very clear that uh the rules of the
rules um uh the time for grace periods
and uh the time for for being uh in a
position where people can wrangle their
way out of it with some excuses
are over
people now cannot travel without
reasonable excuse outside of greater
sydney the permit system allows us to
investigate that it puts more onus on
the person themselves and i must say
that if people think
that they can use an excuse that some
about traveling outside of greater
sydney if people think that they can
trick the police or or see the police
not make investigations they're sadly
wrong
the time is over commissioner fuller is
very very clear
that the operation and we've seen the
last three days and increased police
presence right across this state it will
continue it will not go away until such
times as we get out of this situation
expect the statewide lockdown to extend
beyond this weekend or are you still
looking at lgas that could be let out if
they don't have any cases i think it's
premature to have that conversation you
know we said it was a seven day lockdown
we'll go to crisis committee look at all
the data that is in front of us but you
know look at the numbers today the
number of lgas and communities that have
no infection our surveillance our sewage
surveillance is telling us there's
concerns in bigger parts of of the
regions we've got an issue now mid the
mid north coast so it's a 50 50 call one
that the crisis committee will make but
one that will absolutely be upfront with
the community sooner rather than later